Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Vanessa Wills. She is
associate professor of philosophy at the George Washington University,
and today we're talking about her book, Marx's Ethical
Vision. So, Doctor Wills, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to
everyone. Thank you so much for having me. I'm
excited to, to speak with you today.
So tell me, uh, start by telling us a
little bit about what's behind this book. I mean,
what got you interested in exploring what the Marxist
theory would would entail about the nature of morality.
Uh, SO I was already a philosophy student when
I Uh, became familiar with Marx's ideas and started
to get to know socialists, uh, which happened through
activism that I was doing in the early 2000s.
I joined the anti-war movement, um, protesting against the
US invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the war
on terror, the so-called war on terror in general.
And in doing that, I've uh got to know
more people who were on the left who came
out of a tradition of working class activism and
ideas, and I especially noticed that Uh, after the
2004 presidential election in the United States, many of
the liberals I knew were extremely disoriented and demobilized.
And the people who were ready to hit the
streets again, right? And just kind of, or continue
to. And to keep going and to try to
analyze the moment and think about how to intervene
in it, they were socialists. And that's what I
wanted to be doing. So that is who I
was attracted to and drawn to. And that's how
I got to learn more about Marx's ideas. Um,
And I found that I was also, I also
had these kind of personal questions about just my
involvement in activism, what it is that I was
doing. And so they, the same kind of philosophical
spirit, I guess, that is the reason I was
already a philosophy PhD in the first place, I
brought to that work that I was doing. And
I wanted to, I wanted to investigate these, these
questions about the, the sort of the, the meaning
of this activism and how it fit into a
larger context of how to promote the well-being of,
of, of humans in general, how to, um, do
good in the world. And, and so that's, that
question began to really obsess me.
But one very interesting thing, and you also mentioned
this in your book, is that in the critique
of German ideology, Marx and Engel say that quote,
the communists do not preach morality at all. So
how do you deal with that?
Yeah, that's the, that's the, uh, one of the
most important questions. And I mean, I, I take
it exactly on its face. I think, uh, I
also, uh, think it's a mistake to preach morality
to working people, because I think that the work
that moral philosophers can do is rather to interpret
the Radically, abstractly, and philosophically, um, uh, aims and
practices, uh, that are already existing in working class
struggle. And so I, I take it that what
I'm up to in that book and in a
lot of my work is to, is, is to
think through. TO its logical conclusions, the already existing
activity of working people attempting to survive and attempting
to push back against that which uh frustrates their
ability to satisfy basic needs and much less to
actually flourish as individual human beings.
Mhm. So another thing that I would like to
ask you is, is morality a form of ideology
and what this ideology mean in Marxism?
Yeah, so, uh, so for the first question, I
say yes, but of course that hangs on the
answer to the second question, right, of what is
it when we, what does it mean to talk
about ideology? So, one very common way of thinking
about ideology is that it is always illusory, always,
such as to conceal reality, um, maybe even that
it is inherently reactionary and has an inherent ruling
class, uh, content, um, such that it should, if
on this way of thinking about it, be understood
as a, uh, a conceptual, uh, form through which
a ruling class of society imposes its views of
the world onto those of the, those who are
ruled, right? You know, the working classes, um, those
who are excluded from work, and so on. Um,
AND there's, in my view, there's a partial truth
to this. Ideology does sometimes function in exactly that
way. Uh, BUT I think that it's important to
think about ideology, the way I argue, um, about
it in the book, as I say that ideology
is better understood, um, as a, uh, a, a.
SYSTEM of ideas that give a, a perspective on
the world from the point of view of a
class. And so, of course, we can have bourgeois
ideology, but I argue that there's also proletarian ideology
as well. And that, uh, Marxism should be thought
of, right, as part of a proletarian ideology. Um,
Uh, THAT, that even more thoroughgoing than that, right?
Any, anything that Um, encourages us to think about
the world as something that is historical, that is
dynamic, that is constantly changing, and in a process
of unending transformation into which we are already intervening,
and to which we can intervene more rationally and
more consciously and more collectively and socially than we
have so far. So as To bring about the
conditions for human well-being and flourishing, right? And for
the, um, the expansion of our powers and ways
of interacting with one another in prosocial ways. Um,
THE piece that the, the sort of critical or,
or I should say the pejorative, maybe piece that
remains even on my understanding of ideology is that
it ideology is, is very much a form of
thought that we find in class society. And so
I do think that when we think about the
possibility of moving beyond class society, that part of
what we are talking about then is the abolition
of ideological, uh, ways of thinking as well, right?
Ways of thinking that are themselves structured by the
a conflict. Among economic classes. But we're not there
yet. And so we still have to deal with
ideology. We still have to speak, um, and theorize
in, in the, in the ways that are available
to us. And, and the, and the best way
available to us is, um, is, is, is through
a working class perspective on the world. I mean,
which is what Marx, which is what the materialist
conception of history is. It's what Marxism is.
So about that materialist uh perspective on history, what
does it reveal about the nature of human beings?
Yeah, so in the same portion of the critique
of the German ideology where Marx and Engels introduced
this term, so, um, I'm sure many of your
viewers will, will know, but, um, just to, just
to highlight, so. The critique of the German ideology
is the, the place is sort of, you know,
just shy of midway through, uh, Marx's, uh, uh,
theoretical corpus, that is often identified as the line
of demarcation between the poetic, humanistic, romantic, early Marx,
and the hard-nosed scientific by the Numbers, uh, materialist,
determinist, later marks, right? Um, AND, uh, and it's
the first place that Marx and Engel, his collaborator
Friedrich Engels, present what could be called a kind
of mature, you know, sort of well-developed explanation of
their methodology of, of how it is that they
are approaching the questions they take up. And They,
so they say in the same place where they
talk about the what they call the materialist conception
of history, they say that it is um it
is that their method is to look not at
man, right, capital M, as an abstraction, uh, but
rather men. In actual concrete, historical individual human beings
to examine how it is that human beings have
have uh intervened into their natural and social circumstances
so as to satisfy their needs and how that
Process of labor and needs satisfaction, then transforms human
beings and explains everything, actually, about why it is
that history has unfolded in the way that it
has, and that therefore also provides some guidance about
how human beings might go on to Intervene in
a, a fully in a conscious way, which is
to say, aware of themselves as having this, this,
as being, uh, engaged in this activity of producing
themselves through their interventions into the world out of
which human beings emerge. Um, And, uh, and so
one way that I think about this for myself,
um, when, you know, uh, philosophy is hard and,
and whatever, I feel stuck and I'm trying to
make sense of, of some problem or think through
what it is to have a Marxist approach to
a question. I come back to a little slogan
for myself, which is human existence is a human
product, which is, which can sound very simple and
almost pat, but has profound implications. So I think
it, one great example is in the case of
race. There's a lot of work on race that
treats. AS though they are basically a historical and
natural and sort of given to us. Um, THERE,
that treats racism and racist antipathy as though it
is a ineluctable and ineradicable feature of essential human
nature that can't be done away with. But if
we remember that Human existence as a human product,
and therefore, with the question of race too, we
have to ask how it is that human beings
have produced this concept and produced these ways of
relating to one another and produced these attitudes that
then leads us away from, uh, sort of fatalism
about it, or the idea that it can't be
done away with and leads us toward looking at
what point, at what point in history. And as
a result of what historical forces did this emerge
and come about, and what could potentially be leveraged
and intervened into to do away with racism. Um,
SO that's just to give one example of what
it looks like to take a materialist conception of
history and see what human beings are as having
a history and the content of that history being
human agency, human activity.
Mhm. But I, I mean, in, on the topic
of human nature, what kind of normativity derives then
from this view of human nature, if any, and
what is the rich individual for Marx?
Yes. Um, SO, it's a, uh, it's a great
question because on the one hand, what I've said
is quite thin, you know, so I think that
for Mark's human nature is labor. It is that
activity of conscious and goal-directed intervention into our environments
to satisfy our needs. Um, BUT precisely because I
think almost, well, everything about human beings can be
thought of in these terms and explained in these
terms. Um, IT also means that it's not as
though you can sort of neatly say, well, these
are the things that are instances of labor, and
those things aren't. So those things are somehow, um,
inhuman or uh income or or sort of not
properly thought of as part of human nature. It
all is. Um, BUT the normativity derives from the
fact that some of the things that we do
are such as to promote our existence as as
beings that engage in this process of human self
changing, of human self-creation, and some things are such
as to stultify it and limit it, and prevent
it or bring it to an end altogether. And
I take it that this is one of the
most important arguments for communism and against capitalism, that
that uh that capitalism in a very fundamental and
basic sense is going to kill us, um, you
know, whether it's climate change. Uh, ILLNESS, um, uh,
I mean, you, you war, uh, you name it.
Uh, AND that's even before we get to the
sort of everyday of, um, of, of, of going
to, uh, I mean, I'm fortunate, I'm a philosopher.
I can go to work and dream or whatever,
you know, um, but, you know, but, but, but,
but also just Just the sort of everyday mundane
reality of, uh, you know, of the, the, the
millions of human beings that have lived lives where
they're going to work and doing the same boring,
stultifying, degrading work, hour after hour, day after day,
year after year, until the end, until their lives
end. And which is also a kind of death
for a human being. Um, AND to contrast that
with Marx's idea of, of rich individuality of the
rich human being, he's, he's speaking there of a
person who is, um, engaged in, in, in this,
um, The the the sort of uh all-sided in
principle, limitless proliferation of the ways that they can
engage with other people, with the world around them.
Um, I mean, we, we have this, for example,
it's also in the, um, ideology, you know, Marx
talks about even, uh, even the, the sort of
being constricted to one. Profession, he thinks is at
odds with the notion of rich individuality, um, because
people need time and, and energy and resources to
be a, uh, you know, a, a, a, a
fisher in the morning. And I forget exactly how
it goes, but you know, it's like a fisher
in the morning, you know, a baker in the
afternoon, a critical critic at night, right, and so
on. Um. So, um, so that sense of, um,
of, of, of I've been using the word flourishing
a lot, but what I wanna say is, is
also, you know, the sense of like, of, of
color, a variety of, of, of mixing it up,
of changing, right, of being different things and doing
different things and of having, having possibilities open to
you and having the world open to you and
being able to Embrace life with a spirit of
um creativity and experimentation and having the material resources
available that support that and make that possible, you
know, all of that I think is bound up
with Marx's um argument for why it is that
it's, it's communism, it is uh a society organized
around. Production for the purpose of human beings and
their flourishing rather than for profit, that is actually
compatible with bringing about the full realization of human
essence and human nature, which just is um the
sort of conscious creativity itself.
Mhm. Uh, SINCE we are now about to get
into some bourgeois conceptions of ethical values, critiques of
them, and how they are approached through a Marxist
perspective. First of all, what is bourgeois ethics?
Yeah, great question. So one of the things I,
I say in the book is that when I
use the word bourgeois, so by bourgeois, first of
all, most simply, you know, we mean capitalist, right?
We mean, um, we mean, uh, having to do,
of having to do or associated with. Um, THAT
class in a capitalist society, which owns the means
of production, factories, um, raw materials, and so on.
Um, WHICH owns the means of production and is
able to, uh, sustains itself and satisfy its needs
in virtue of the fact that it owns the
means of production for that society, um, and therefore
does not have to sell its labor for a.
Wage, unlike the working class, um, which does, um,
which, which, which satisfies its needs by selling its
ability to work as a commodity to capitalists. Um,
SO when I say bourgeois, right, one thing I
just mean is that thing, right? Having to do
with that capitalist class. Um, BUT it's important to
note, and I say this in the book, that
I do not use bourgeois as merely some sort
of shady epithet, right, or name calling. Sometimes people,
oh, it's so bourgeois. OK, that's not what I'm
doing in the book, right? I'm, I'm using it
as a kind of scientific category, um. And, uh,
and, and bourgeois bourgeois ethics, I mean, I, so
I am convinced by Marx's argument, and he's, um,
he's, he's following a point made by Hegel earlier
that the, the sort of sine qua non of
bourgeois ethics is utilitarianism, right? You know, is this
emphasis on cal ability on, on, on utility, right,
on the sort of, um, uh, uh, like identifying
the value of a thing in virtue of, uh,
it's suitability as a means to some further end.
And in uh in utilitarianism, as in capitalism, the
end is is sort of like the endless accumulation
of a of a of a good, you know,
um, whether it's utility on the one hand or
capital on the other. Um, WITH some of the
other forms of, um, Of, of, of, of ethical
systems that Marx himself criticizes and that I discuss
in the book, the um the connection is less
plainly obvious, but I think in the case of
Kantunism, for example, which is An ethical view that's
often thought together with Marxism, and there's this long
standing debate and question about whether perhaps Marxism can
be made compatible with Kantian ethics and vice versa.
You know, I think you, you still have there
the, the fact that um there's a, a, a
strong emphasis on this notion of an undetermined free
will, um, this kind of philosophically idealist. Um, A
conception of the human being as, um, being most
importantly identified with this pure act of, of willing.
Um, AND, and that's the sort of thing that
Marx is gonna think. IS totally incompatible um with
a a viewpoint that is um materialist in the
way that he is, namely, thinking there's nothing about
human beings that can be detached somehow from, uh,
thinking about them in their specific context and in
virtue of their needs and interests. And the last
thing I'll say, cause this is a long answer,
but the last thing I'll say about this is
that um Uh, you know, Marx is very Marx
embraces the idea of encouraging people to act according
to their interests. Um, THIS is the essence of,
I mean, maybe essence is too strong, but this
is a this is like a very significant part
of what's going on. Um, IN Marx's writings that
for the, the it's precisely why the working class
is the class that he identifies as an agent
of historical change. It's because he thinks that the
interest that working class people have in surviving and
in not being abused, um, is in alignment with
the interests of humanity in continuing to exist and,
and, you know, perhaps more than exist, maybe have
a good time while we're existing, continue to make
art, continue to, you know, to have social interactions
that are positive and fulfilling. Um, AND so that
too is gonna be quite a, a difference from
something like Communism, which is very skeptical of the
notion of acting in accordance with your interests and,
um, and, and advocates this kind of um Uh,
sacrifice of, of self-interest. So the question is like
what bourgeois ethics, it's gonna depend on what ethical
system we're talking about, but that's just by way
of pointing out some of the things that Mark
sees as distinguishing his view from some of these
others.
Mhm. So, now I want to ask you about
some specific, uh, ethical values that you explore in
the book and their bourgeois version and then how
we can approach them through a Marxist perspective. So,
starting with individuality, what is individuality and why does
it matter?
That's a great question. What is individual? I mean,
so, in the, in the book, I think about,
I, I, I sort of talk about um A
conception of individuality that Marx has in mind, and
then the question, and then a sort of, and
then that's um contrasted with what he he sees
as a capitalist or bourgeois kind of individuality that
is um that is that is grounded in A
kind of rigid opposition between the individual and the
social, um, that is that, uh, so he's, this
comes up in places like, for example, the, the
communist manifesto, where Marx imagines a uh a kind
of bourgeois critic. Um, SAYING you want to do
away with individuality, and then the answer is, uh,
we want to do away with your kind of
individuality, namely this atomized separateness of of of hostile
and competitive individuals who um regard for whom sociality
is a kind of necessary evil. Um, AND to
be mitigated and guarded against jealously, you know, in
every, in every possible way. Um, AND that's, and
that's the vision of, of individuality that Mark sees
as, um, existing in liberalism and sort of social
contract theory and so on. And He opposes to
it a conception of individuality, uh that is that
is that represents a kind of abolition or overcoming.
Of the seeming opposition between the social and the
individual, um, marks uh sometimes rights of the social
individual, uh, the, the, the person who is only
made possible through the, through, through their interactions with
society, um, uh, and, and only as a result
of various kinds of historical transformations over time. And
to, to put that a different way, um, you
know, we express our even under capitalism, we express
our individuality in all sorts of ways. Um, I,
I love going to the opera. I love cooking.
Um, I love camping, you know, like there's all
these, all these things, you know, that are ways
that I like to spend my time if I
can. Um, BUT all of those concepts are totally
historical concepts, right, um, you know, they emerge out
of a whole history of ways that human beings
have developed. Uh, TO, uh, interact with the world
around them and to conceptualize what it is that
they're doing. Um, AND, and, and so the, the
thought is that it's precisely because of the whole
complexity of human behavior and ways of organizing and
thinking about that behavior that I have available to
me all sorts of ways that I might express
myself in the world, um, which is a, which
is like part and parcel of what makes me
not like the exactly like the person next to
me, right? You know, for all of us. And
so for individuality individuality to be something more than
just the bare fact that we are accountable, you
know, that, that us in this conversation, there's one
and then another one, you know, like, for it
to mean something more than that, um, you know,
requires this whole socio historical story that's gone before.
And so Marx, uh, argues that individuality, um, is
a result of sociality and is, um, is, is
instead of looking at it the other way around
and sort of thinking that society is something that
individuals then on the basis of their rational self-interest
decide to tolerate, you know, what if we look
at the fact that sociality is the kind of,
um, And like original fact of of human of
human existence, which gives rise to the different ways
that individuals might develop themselves and and emerge. Um,
SO it's hard for me to, it's, you know,
because that is the way that I'm thinking about
individuality and and and and the way that I'm
reading marks on individuality. It's hard for me to
actually give a kind of a kind of like
what individuality is in general, right? What it is
that individuality is like a concept of individuality that
is abstract in a way that captures both of
these different ways of thinking about it. Um, AND,
and, and especially cause I tend to think that
the more the more the abstract you get, the
more the closer. You get to the sort of,
well, there's one, and then there's another 12 individual
people. Well, who cares, you know? Um, BUT the
other, the, it's, it's the, it's the, it's the
fact of what it means to have all, you
know, a diverse array of different human beings who
interact with the world in, in their own, uh,
distinctive ways that makes individuality matter, I think. Mhm.
And how about rights? I mean, what are bourgeois
equal rights and would there be rights in communism
or not?
Yeah, yeah, so, um, uh, so, so yeah, so
Marxx, um. There's a number of places where, uh,
Marx addresses the question of rights. And, and one
of the places that I, um, uh, that I
look at most, or, or that figures, I think
most significantly into my argument, uh, in that portion
of the book is the critique of the go
to program, um, where he's, uh, critical of attempts
to Describe capitalism as unjust or as a kind
of rights violation, and he argues that it is
just, uh, it, it is fair, um, and the
reason and and it's fair and according to the
internal standards of capitalism, but there's also, um, for
Marx, a kind of um I think, um, a
a a kind of historical um assessment of the
of the nature of a right. Um, WHERE, where
he's seeing that rights themselves presuppose a context in
which you're called upon to defend your rights, and
you're called upon to um make a claim against
others, um, that is based in rights. And so
he sees it as, um, As as intrinsically, I,
I mean, sort of the same story I gave
about individuality actually, you know, has, uh, important, uh,
you know, links, you know, and kind of dovetails
with the story about rights, um, because the, the
idea of Rights, at least as the individual rights
of capitalist society and liberal democracy, you know, presupposes
the kind of and, uh, generalized antagonism among individuals
that, um, we see actually in capitalist society. Um,
SO, um, so he, so he, uh, he, so
I think the way to think about rights is
that in Uh, a fully developed communist society, if
we ever see one of those, um, that, um,
that the, the salience of an a right. IS
not sort of disappears, sort of goes away, right?
Because if, if this is if we are imagining
a society that's organized precisely to satisfy people's needs
and to make available the things that they want
and require, and I want, I want to be
clear in my what needs here is met extremely
broadly, right? Um, THE, the need for a person
to have access to paint and paintbrushes is going
to count, right? Um. Uh, THE, um, and so
if we have a society that's organized in that
way, and we have a society that, um, is
organized in such a way that the flourishing of
each is the condition of the flourishing of all,
right? Such that for me to insist upon what
I need is also for me directly to insist
on something that you need as well. It seems
to me we could talk about rights in that
context, but I'm not sure what it would add,
um, concretely speaking, um, And, uh, and so I,
I argue that rights that will be abolished along
with lots of other lots of other stuff, right?
Um, AND, uh, but it's important to be, I
think it's important to be very careful about this,
and I engage in the in the rights chapter.
I engage um with uh the work of another
Marx scholar, Igor Scherke Brod, because I think that
he very nicely, um, insists that Marxists should not
be glib about rights in the present world. Um,
WHERE as we know, they are constantly being run
over roughshod, and they do provide, um, a language
that people can use to defend themselves, and I
completely agree with him about this and think it
is a very real danger and one that I
would also be keen to avoid. Um, BUT I
disagree about the sort of the, the abstract question
about whether it would make sense to say that
there's rights of this kind in a, in a
communist, uh, future.
Mhm. And I'm going to ask you a little
bit more about that potential or possible communist future
in a second, but just before that, uh, Marx,
uh, famously seems to call for the abolition of
morality altogether. So what would abolition be like in
this context?
Mhm. Yeah. So it goes, uh, it goes back
to, I think the first or second question you
asked about ideology, because morality is a form of
ideology, and ideology is a, a, a, a sort
of classed perspective on a class conflict. And so
if what we're imagining is the abolition of class
society and certainly of, of, of class conflict, obviously,
um, Then, then the question arises, like, you know,
where, where does morality go? And there's a, there's,
there's a couple ways to think about this. I'm
gonna present two of them, right? So, so one
is that, uh, I think it's useful to think
about morality as a way of theorizing a gap
between the world as it is and the world
as it should be. And I use that formulation
of on a few occasions throughout the book, but
keen obs you know, I keen observers with lots
of time on their hands will notice that there's
a footnote. Um, AT one point in the book,
I think it is in the abolition of morality
chapter. Um, WHERE I say, well, of course, um,
this is a bit of a, um, heuristic way
of speaking, because, um, because actually the whole point
for Marx is, is not that there's a huge
gap, but rather that the world that should be
is already existing within the car. ONE, right? I
precisely in the persons of the working class, right?
Um, BUT, OK, that aside, right, you know, thinking
about morality as, you know, how is it that
things ought to be, but so far aren't. And
so if we think about morality in that way,
Then, um, morality goes this to this the same
place where rights go, right? Um, HOW do you,
what is the theory to analyze the world, the,
the gap between the world as it is and
the world as it should be when the world
is actually made as it should be. Um, SO
the sort of content, um, for uh moral theorizing
to be about, um, is abolished, right? And so,
and so therefore the, the sort of theoretical practice
as well. Um, SO that's 11 way to talk
about it, but I think, but the second way
that I'll mention, and the one that I, uh,
uh, I, I spell this out too, you know,
in that chapter, um. Is that Marx uses this
throughout his writings, he comes back to the idea
that our human senses are themselves historical products. So
again, coming back to human existence as a human
product. He, um, so our sense of, of, of
hearing, right? The difference between hearing just like a
god awful clang and hearing. Experimental music, um, it's
mostly exposure, uh, and, and maybe a little theory,
maybe somebody explained something to you, but you, but
it's not biological, it's not physiological, you have the
same ear. Um, AND Marx uses a a a
number of uh examples like this throughout his writing
and he, and he also uses it to talk
about the, the eye, um. And ways of seeing,
right? And, and, and how that that changes, right?
Our ability to see and to interpret the world,
um, uh, not through any physiological change, through a,
uh, educational and cultural one. And I think something
like this is what he has in mind for
human beings. He actually talks about, uh, sight, he
talks about transformations in sight and hearing and Uh,
smell, and then he talks about a human sense.
And so I unpack what is, what is the
human sense and The human sense for Marx is,
um, for one thing, it's precisely the thing that
he thinks is conspicuously missing in utilitarianism, not to
beat up on the utilitarianism, right, but it's the
thing he thinks is conspicuously missing there because, um,
and it and it and and that also is
broadly speaking, conspicuously missing in the In the apperceptive
capacities of a species whose life is dominated by
commodity exchange, is dominated by the um the making
the making totally universally interchangeable of all things, so
that we see things and we think, how much
can I get for that? Right, we, there's a
sort of like instant translation into abstract quantitative accumulation
of value, of just abstract value. Um This is,
this is something that Marx thinks absolutely has to
be healed and overcome, uh, that part of the
transformation that human beings must affect in themselves in
order for communism to be possible, is to apprehend
the world around them and see it, uh, see
it for what it is, see it in itself,
um. I mean this even this is this is
something he talked, this is something that comes up
throughout capital, but even. Very early on in things
like the the Power of Money, one of the
1844 manuscripts, where Marx is writing about how money
sort of confounds all differences and turns everything into
its opposite, and you can, um, uh, you can
and, and he says the the, uh, the, the
what It would be for this to no longer
be the case, um, would mean, for example, that
if you want to be loved, uh, you couldn't
just shell out cash for it. You would, you
have to be lovable. And if you're not lovable,
I don't know, you know, like, but, you know,
there's this, there's this, this sort of, um, this,
this distinction in marks between The ways that um
the ways that universal commodity exchange is also the
universal emptying out of difference, um, and of specificity
and unique. And, and I think part of what's
going on for Marx is that he thinks if
we can fix that, if you can actually see
a human being, not in, not in an alienated
way where you see a human being and all
you see is a means to an end, and
here you can hear why people think maybe Conti
and ethics will work with this, because there is
some affinity. Um, BUT if you can look at
a human being and rather than seeing a means
to your private end, you see instead, like, a
being with needs, who is your, your sibling, right?
Who is like, who is you, um, and, um,
and who has, uh, conditions of well-being and of
flourishing that are also yours and that you have
a direct interest in promoting. You know, I think
that's what Mark sees as replacing, you know, our
kind of ham-fisted attempts now. Like, it's good that
we do them, but we're reduced to these ham-fisted
attempts to ask ourselves, well, if I were a
good person, what would I do then? You know,
like, if I, if I, um, if I I
think if I did really understand that other human
beings exist and are and have their own, you
know, their own like conditions of well-being, and there
are things they're doing that matter to them. Well,
how would I behave then? And, and so I
think Marx is asking is, is, you know, for
ethics, as is so often the case with Marx,
the dis is in painting a, uh, a trail,
you know, a kind of a path forward where
that world that we represent in thought as desirable
is not just a kind of mere ethical ideal,
but is something that we could actually bring about.
Mhm.
So keeping in mind then that according to Marx,
at least, ethics would be abolished in a fully
developed communist society and it would be sort of
just a transitory historical phenomenon. Um, WHAT would it
be like to exist and uh socially interact in
such a society?
Oh, yeah, great question. I don't think I know.
I mean, I, you know, I think, I mean,
some of what I've already said suggests some things
about what it would be like, but I, I
think I'm, I think what I'm noticing within myself
as I attempt to answer your question, is that
I'm hesitant to, um, I, I'm hesitant to Uh,
sort of, you know, make recipes for the cookshops
of the future, to coin a phrase, you know
what I mean? LIKE. Um, I mean, I think
we are, I mean, I think some of the
places that we can look for hints is in
what we already experience as some of the more
prosocial forms of interaction. That we somehow miraculously managed
to pull off even in today, you know, um,
and so, um, like I'll like I'll give you
an example, like I've When I've, um, I don't
have this anymore so much, but back in the
day when I was starting to teach undergrads, um,
I would, uh, you know, the students all would,
when if marks would come up, you know, the
students would always, um, say, well, but people are
just selfish. And, you know, nobody does anything unless
there's something in it for them. And, um, and,
and so on. And so, I remember one exchange
where a student expressed something of that nature. And
then I, I asked her if she did any
volunteering. And she said, yeah. She's like, what does
that have to do with Ada? But she says,
Yeah, I do, you know. And I'm like, well,
tell me about it. You know, I'm curious. And
she says, Well, you know, a couple days after
her face lights up, right? And she says, Well,
you know, a couple days after school, I go
to this elementary school, that's just a couple of
blocks away from campus. And I, I read to
the kids and I, I help them to improve
their literacy skills. And I'm like, well, you know,
what do you enjoy about doing that? And she's
like, Oh, you know, it's just great to be
with them and I'm helping, and I can see
them grow. And, you know, it's just a really,
it's just something that's really wonderful to do. And,
and I'm like, do you get paid for it?
And she says, No, no. It's, it's completely volunteer.
And I'm like, You know, it turns out that
people like, even, even in a world where every
minute that you spend helping another person for free
is in fact taking the food out of your
own mouth, because that's those are the perverse incentives
under which we exist. Um, PEOPLE crave to Help.
They crave to be together. I mean, I think
this is even, I mean, there's lots of terrible
lessons to take from, uh, COVID-19 and the pandemic
and lockdown and the sort of reactionary and irrational
ways that people have responded to it. But in
my most generous moods, you know, When I think
about the, uh, you know, some of the, some
of the, uh, hostility that people had to social
distancing and to staying at home, whatever, you know,
when I'm feeling my most generous, I think, well,
you know, people want to be together. They really
want to be together. They want to be with
one another. Um, OK, you know, like they should
wear a mask while doing it, you know, but,
um, but I, I just think there's, um, there's
things that we see, you know, even under the
conditions in which we live now, that just make
it clear that there's really good reason. To think
that if we could remove some of the barriers
to that, that what we would find is a
lot of loving, prosocial, collaborative, um, creative activity, right?
And, and ways of, of, of being among one
another. Um I can't guarantee that to anyone, you
know? And I, and I, and, and also the
people of this kind of future society, like would
it, it, it, by the very nature of the
case, would be a people formed by a whole
history that hasn't happened yet, right? So it's, it's
difficult to say exactly what life would look like
for them. But I think there's things about what
life looks like for us that give a lot
of good reason for hope, you know, people already
engage in all kinds of activity where the aim
is to, um, is to be good to to
their fellow human beings. Mhm.
Uh, I have two more questions then. The first
one going back for a second to the topic
of bourgeois ethics or the ethics or ethical values
of the capitalist class. Um, THIS neoliberal capitalism or
has it even delivered on its promise of uh
freedom, which is something we haven't really uh touched
on, uh, human rights and the other values associated
with it.
So you won't be surprised to hear that I
think the answer is a resounding no. Um, AND,
um, I mean, I, I Yeah, I'm sort of
tough. I'm just like, no, uh, no, it, it
hasn't, you know, and I, I think, you know,
of the proof is in the pudding. We're at
a point today where, where people can look back
and, and see that what has, what has occurred
over the last, you know, let's say 50 years
of neoliberal reaction and attacks on Um, any, any
influence that working class movements have had, uh, in,
in society and, and, and actually expanding freedom and,
and it whether it's, um, Uh, you know, the
student movements of the 1960s globally, whether it's uh
decolonial movements globally, um, well, you know, in the
US I'm here in the US, so in the
US case, things like the civil rights movement, the
queer rights movement, women's movement, and so on, you
know, all of the ways that neoliberalism. Has been
a, you know, roughly half century long onslaught against
all of that. Uh, WE can see now that
the result is, um, just just reaction and loss
of freedom. I mean, even if, even if we
think of freedom in a Very, like, rudimentary way
in terms of just the, the, the, the resources
that people have to be able to do what
they want. People make less money. You know, like,
just like in the most like basic sense, you
know, not to mention the assaults on, uh, intellectual,
um, freedom that we have. uh, YOU know, all
over the world and of course, quite famously like
in the US there's these, you know, with um
the attacks on universities that are going on here,
but of course, you see it also, you know,
it's been, uh, it's been uh underway for a
long time in places like Hungary, for example, you
know, sort of way further down that road that
we seem to be headed down now here. Um,
uh, YOU know, I, it, it's, uh, but, you
know, it, it, it has, however, it must be
sad, um, also promoted a lot of freedom for
capitalists, right? You know, and that kind of goes
to, again, Marx's critique of bourgeois rights and bourgeois
individuality, and in this case, bourgeois freedom, um, because
The freedom of capital to move around the planet,
neoliberalism has done a great job of advancing that.
Um, THE, the freedom of capitalists to do what
they want without any fetter placed on them whatsoever
by law or by the demands of uh the
masses of society. Neoliberalism has done a great job
of establishing that. So, um, but, you know, but
that's why we need a critique of the concept
of freedom, right? And who's, and who's and what
kinds of freedom are, are being promoted and which
are, are, um, you know, highly damaged.
Mhm. So, my last question then, and going back
to the idea of human existence itself as a
human product, uh, should intellectuals, I mean, academics and
other kinds of intellectuals also contribute in some way
to these human product?
Um, WELL, I think we are, right? I mean,
so part part of the, part of, uh, the
implication of that is that we always already are,
and then, so then the question is, um, Do
we, do we have an uh a kind of
obligation of some kind to contribute positively, uh, rather
than not, and Uh, you know, I, I say
yes, a resounding yes, yes, yes, um. It's Oh
I, I can't, I can't imagine, it's hard for
me to imagine doing anything else with the fact
that, you know, I've had the opportunity to learn,
um, quite a lot. I have the opportunity to
study. I have the opportunity to write, um, and
to let my views be known. Um, AND it's,
uh, it's hard for me to think of another
worthwhile purpose, um, other than to put all of
that to the service of humanity, of, of human
beings, um. And so I think, I think absolutely
that that, you know, and it doesn't, and I'm
not saying it always has to be a narrow,
uh, it doesn't have to be narrowly construed, you
know, not, I'm not saying every academic needs to
drop everything and work, uh, self-consciously for revolution or
something, although that would be great. Um, BUT, you
know, but I think there's there's all kinds of
work that people, people do that, um, that helps
to Helps to demonstrate the incredible potential of human
beings. Um, AND, uh, you know, I think we
see it, for example, um, in the attacks on
science, um, in the US, which I think is
highly uh tied to the attacks on trans people
as well, but and, and both of these are
also global phenomena. Um, BUT, uh, you know, the,
the like when trans people use the, um, the,
the, the knowledge and the tools developed by science
to improve their lives, to, to go from feeling
um unable to show up in the world in
a way that, that, that matches their identity and
that is affirming of who they are as individual
people. Um, THEY, what part, I mean, one of
the things that they're demonstrating is that there can
be better living through science, right? That, that, that
having knowledge of the world and having the ability
to manipulate it, you know, can put us in
charge of what we are and how we show
up. And that is a dangerous proposition. Uh, WHEN
you are promoting a, uh, a, a reactionary right
wing perspective that absolutely requires, uh, lowering expectations and
convincing people that, you know, Margaret Thatcher style, there
is no alternative. The world you live in and
the way you exist in it is the, that's
it. This is it, you know, there's no changing
it, um, and so, uh, you know, I think
there's lots of science that people do that of
course is not in any way directly tied to
uh a political project, but that is about how
can human beings intervene into the world in such
a way as to make our lives better. Um,
AND I think, I, I mean, I think all
of, all of that is important and necessary, and
yes, I do think there's an obligation to think
through in some way, you know, how it is
that your work helps to promote human well-being.
Mm. By the way, since you mentioned trans people,
I can't resist asking you this question, which will
be then the last one. Do you think that
Marx himself would be open to and that Marxism
easily accommodates for an intersectional perspective on things like
going beyond class and also including other social categories
like race and gender?
Yeah, so in my, so, so, uh, I'll answer
those questions separately cause I think Marx himself, um,
is there's this, uh, there's this kind of often
held view of Marx, that he didn't think about
race or he didn't think about gender. Um, BUT
Marx actually wrote, uh, you know, not infrequently about
about both of these issues. Um, HE, uh, uh
wrote. Uh, HE would write articles for uh US
newspapers, uh, I mean, I remember Marx was living
at the time of the US Civil War, um,
and so he wrote like an open letter to
Abraham Lincoln. He wrote an open letter to white
workers in the United States telling them that labor
in the white skin cannot be free so long
as in the black it's branded. Um, HE and,
uh, and Engels, you know, thought a lot about
the case of workers in Ireland who were often
made subject to a kind of racialized oppression, right,
and exclusion. Um, AND, um, there's a, um, I
mean, there's, there's, uh, a, a decent amount of
good work on this one book in particular is
like Kevin B. Anderson's Marks at the Margins, which
actually is just about these, uh, kinds of questions.
Um, Marx and Engels, you know, including in even
in the communist manifesto itself, but also elsewhere, they,
they talk about the situation of women, they talk
about um the uh the nature of the, the
nuclear family and how it also um Oppresses children,
right? It makes children uh sort of abjectly um
subject to the whims of their parents, uh, which,
uh, can, you know, be a bad thing if
the parents are abusive, right? Um. Uh, YOU know,
they, they thought oh quite a they they thought
quite a lot about these things, and Uh, you
know, they, they, they wrote that, um, you could,
you could tell the level of alienation in a
society by looking at how women are treated in
the society. Um, BECAUSE women, after all, are people.
And so if women are being treated, uh, in
a way that subordinates and dehumanizes them, that's a,
that's, that tells you something about, you know, how
degraded the society is in terms of its ability
to, uh, to apprehend the, um, the, the significance
of what it is to come to, to, to
be in the presence of another human being. Um,
SO I, I think both in, in, in, in
Marx's work and in, in his work with Engels
and Um, but also, you know, the Marxist tradition
more broadly. Um, ONE of the things that I,
uh, say as often as anybody will, will, will
hear me say it is that the idea that
Marxism is white or that Marxism is male, it,
it's, it's difficult to Maintain that belief, unless you
discount a lot of Marxists who have written and
struggled and were not white and were not male.
And probably in terms of sheer numbers, I would,
I haven't counted, but I would venture to guess
that the absolute majority of people who have ever
identified as Marxists and seen themselves as liberating, um,
as being part of a Marxist liberation struggle, probably
were not white, right? And so it's some of
it is a, uh, I think, a kind of,
um, Myopia, right? And, uh, and uh, uh, of,
uh uh refusal or at least, I don't know,
incapacity or neglect at least to, to think globally
about the impact of Marx's ideas and who has
taken them up. Um, AND in my own work,
I, I, I, I bring these things together. Um,
I have a, uh, uh, a few years before,
um, I published my book. I have, uh, an
article. Um, CALLED What could it mean to say
Capitalism causes sexism and racism, and one of the
things that I take up there is that Um,
Marx is not a class reductionist view, and the
reason that class matters the way it does for
Marx is that his emphasis is on production, on
how it is that human beings are producing their
circumstances, and it so happens in a class society
that production is organized according to class, and that's
why it matters. Um. But that doesn't uh mean
that uh we don't attend to all the other
things that human beings produce through through class, um,
and in ways that are shaped by class, which
includes racism and sexism, and, you know, all the,
all the rest, you know, all the other um
transphobia and homophobia and so on.
Mhm. Great. So, the book is again Marx's ethical
vision. Of course, I'm leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview. And Doctor Wills,
just before we go, apart from the book, would
you like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet?
Certainly. So I have a website, it's vanessawills.com. And
sometimes I post on Twitter, um, or sorry, X.
So, and so my handle there is uh VC
W I L L S VCs. And those are
usually the best two places to um learn about
my work.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a very fascinating conversation.
Thank you. These are great questions. It's really lovely
to be in conversation with you. Thanks for having
me on.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor, Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan La Jasent and the Samuel
Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran
David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono
Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa
medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson,
Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.